# What-is-HIPAA-Compliance
What is HIPAA Compliance? https://www.netsec.news/what-is-hipaa-compliance/ Although most individuals and organization in healthcare-related industries will be aware of HIPAA and the legal requirement to comply with its regulations, there may be some entities looking to enter a healthcare-related industry asking the question “What is HIPAA compliance?” This article intends to answer the question, explain its objectives, and why it is important to comply with its regulations. This article will also look at some of the compliance requirements, the steps HIPAA-covered individuals and organizations must take in order to comply with the requirements, and the consequences of failing to comply with HIPAA. If you are still confused about “What is HIPAA compliance?” after reading this article, you should seek professional guidance about your specific compliance obligations. What is HIPAA? HIPAA is an acronym for the Healthcare Insurance Portability and Accountability Act. The original motive of the Act was to improve the portability and continuity of health insurance coverage; but, as the Act passed through Congress, amendments were added to (among other things) combat waste, fraud and abuse in health insurance and the delivery of healthcare. One of the key objectives of the Act when it was enacted in 1996 was to increase the efficiency of the healthcare system by creating standards for the use and dissemination of healthcare information. To this end, the Department of Health and Human Services was tasked with developing Rules to protect patient privacy and the security of their healthcare information. The result was the publication of the HIPAA Privacy Rule in 2000 and the HIPAA Security Rule in 2003. These rules have since been updated in part by the Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health (HITECH) in 2009 and the Final Omnibus Rule in 2013, and enforced by the HIPAA Enforcement Rule and HIPAA Breach Notification Rule. Why is it Important to Comply with HIPAA? HIPAA-covered individuals and organizations have access to patient health and payment information – often referred to as individually identifiable health information or Protected Health Information (PHI). PHI, when disclosed to the wrong person, can be used to commit identity theft, insurance fraud and other crimes. Compliance with HIPAA mitigates the risk that PHI will be disclosed without authorization. As well as protecting patients, compliance with HIPAA mitigates the risk of insider theft, network infiltration and malware infections such as ransomware. Compliance with HIPAA therefore also protects the individual or organization from theft, fraud and loss – not only financial loss and critical data loss, but also loss of reputation, from which it can take a lot longer to recover. The third reason why it is important to comply with HIPAA is because it is the law. The Department of Health &amp; Human Services´ Office for Civil Rights has the power to impose fines or pursue criminal convictions or failing to comply with HIPAA. State Attorneys General can also take legal action, as can patients whose PHI has been disclosed without authorization and used to commit fraud.
